Add more docs on WAL failover (#19052)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v24.3/wal-failover.md

WAL failover uses a secondary disk to failover WAL writes to when transient disk stalls occur. This limits the write impact to a few hundreds of milliseconds (the [failover threshold, which is configurable]()). Note that WAL failover _only preserves availability of writes_. If reads to the underlying storage are also stalled, operations that read and do not find data in the block cache or page cache will stall.

## Creating and configuring a cluster to be ready for WAL Failover

The steps to provision a cluster that has single data store vs a multi-store cluster are slightly different. In this section, we will provide high-level instructions for setting up each of these configurations. We will use [GCE](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs) as the environment. You will need to translate these instructions into the steps used by the deployment tools in your environment.

<a name="multi-store-config"></a>

### Provisioning a multi-store cluster for WAL failover

In this section, we will explain how to provision a multi-store cluster and configure it for WAL failover.

> #### 1. Create the cluster

Author: passing for now

Provision a 3 node cluster with 4 SSDs for each node. Deploy each node to a different region (e.g. [in GCE](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/regions-zones), `us-east4-a`, `us-west2-b`, `us-central1-c`). Be sure to [create a separate volume for each SSD](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks).

#### 2. Stage the cluster

[Install CockroachDB]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/install-cockroachdb-linux.md %}) on each node.

> #### 3. Log Configuration for WAL Failover

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 3. Log configuration for WAL failover
```

Author: ✅

If you are logging to a file-based sink, create a `logs.yaml` file. Later on, you will pass this file to `cockroach start` when starting each node in the cluster. Not doing so will negate the positive impact of enabling WAL failover, because writes to the diagnostic logs may block indefinitely during the disk stall, effectively stalling the node.

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-log-config.md %}

Next transfer this file to the nodes on the cluster.

For more information about how to configure CockroachDB logs, see [Configure logs]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-logs.md %}).

> #### 4. Starting the multi-store cluster with WAL failover enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 4. Start the multi-store cluster with WAL failover enabled
```

Author: fixed here and elsewhere

<a name="single-store-config"></a>

### Provisioning a cluster with single data store, single failover disk for WAL failover

When you have a cluster with a single data store and you want to configure the cluster with WAL failover, make sure that you have at least two disks on each node of the cluster: one for the data store, and one small side disk to failover the WAL to. The side disk should have the following properties:

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-side-disk.md %}

<a name="1-sidecar-create"></a>

#### 1. Create the cluster

Provision a 3 node cluster with 2 SSDs for each node. Deploy each node to a different region (e.g. [in GCE](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/regions-zones), `us-east4-a`, `us-west2-b`, `us-central1-c`). Be sure to [create a separate volume for each SSD](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks).

<a name="2-sidecar-stage"></a>

#### 2. Stage the cluster

[Install CockroachDB]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/install-cockroachdb-linux.md %}) on each node.

<a name="3-sidecar-configure-logs"></a>

#### 3. Log Configuration for WAL Failover

> If you are logging to a file-based sink, create a `logs.yaml` file. Later on, you will pass this file to `cockroach start` when starting each node in the cluster. Not doing so will negate the positive impact of enabling WAL failover, because writes to the diagnostic logs may block indefinitely during the disk stall, effectively stalling the node.

Author: ✅

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-log-config.md %}

> Next transfer this file to the nodes on the cluster.

Author: ✅

> For more information about how to configure CockroachDB logs, see [Configure logs]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-logs.md %}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about how to configure CockroachDB logs, refer to [Configure logs]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-logs.md %}).
```

Author: ✅

<a name="4-sidecar-prepare-failover-disk"></a>

> #### 4. Preparing the WAL Failover side disk on the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 4. Prepare the WAL failover side disk on the cluster
```

Author: ✅

> To enable WAL failover on a single data store cluster with a side disk, you need to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable WAL failover on a single-store cluster with a side disk, you need to:
```

1. Make sure that each node has an additional disk available for WAL failover before starting the cluster (as described in [Step 1](#1-sidecar-create)).

> 2. Know the path to this side disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Know the path to this side disk.
```

Author: fixed here and in the other location

> To find out the path to side disk, `ssh` to one of the nodes in the cluster and use the `lsblk` command to see the path to the `data2` volume. The output should look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find out the path to the side disk, `ssh` to one of the nodes in the cluster and use the `lsblk` command to see the path to the `data2` volume. The output should look like the following:
```

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
NAME    MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINTS
loop0     7:0    0  63.9M  1 loop /snap/core20/2182
loop1     7:1    0 354.3M  1 loop /snap/google-cloud-cli/223
loop2     7:2    0    87M  1 loop /snap/lxd/27428
loop3     7:3    0  39.1M  1 loop /snap/snapd/21184
sda       8:0    0    10G  0 disk
├─sda1    8:1    0   9.9G  0 part /
├─sda14   8:14   0     4M  0 part
└─sda15   8:15   0   106M  0 part /boot/efi
nvme0n1 259:0    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data1
nvme0n2 259:1    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data2
~~~

> Here we can see the path to `data2` volume is `/mnt/data2`. For each node, create the directory `/mnt/data2/cockroach` on the side disk volume where the WAL failover data can be written. `/mnt/data1` will be used as the single user data store for the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preceding output shows that the path to `data2` volume is `/mnt/data2`. For each node, create the directory `/mnt/data2/cockroach` on the side disk volume where the WAL failover data can be written. `/mnt/data1` will be used as the single store for the cluster.
```

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
mkdir /mnt/data2/cockroach
~~~

<a name="5-sidecar-start"></a>

> #### 5. Starting the cluster with WAL failover enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 5. Start the cluster with WAL failover enabled
```

Author: ✅

> To enable WAL failover when we start the cluster,  we can either pass the [`--wal-failover=path={ path-to-my-side-disk-for-wal-failover }` to `cockroach start`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md%}#enable-wal-failover)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable WAL failover when you start the cluster, either pass the [`--wal-failover=path={ path-to-my-side-disk-for-wal-failover }` to `cockroach start`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md%}#enable-wal-failover)
```

Author: ✅

 *OR*

set [the environment variable `COCKROACH_WAL_FAILOVER=path={ path-to-my-side-disk-for-wal-failover }`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md%}#enable-wal-failover) before starting the cluster.

> Additionally, we must set the value of the environment variable `COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT` to `40s`. By default, CockroachDB detects prolonged stalls and crashes the node after `20s`. With WAL failover enabled, CockroachDB should be able to survive stalls of up to `40s` with minimal impact to the workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, you must set the value of the environment variable `COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT` to `40s`. By default, CockroachDB detects prolonged stalls and crashes the node after `20s`. With WAL failover enabled, CockroachDB should be able to survive stalls of up to `40s` with minimal impact to the workload.
```

Author: ✅

> We must also [configure logs]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-logs.md %}) by passing in the `logs.yaml` file that we configured in [Step 3](#3-sidecar-configure-logs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must also [configure logs]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-logs.md %}) by passing in the `logs.yaml` file that you configured in [Step 3](#3-sidecar-configure-logs).
```

Author: ✅

Replicate the shell commands below on each node using your preferred deployment model. Be sure to edit the values of the flags passed to [`cockroach start`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}) as needed for your environment.

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
$ export COCKROACH_LOG_MAX_SYNC_DURATION=40s
$ export COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT=40s
$ cockroach start --certs-dir certs --listen-addr=:26257 --http-addr=:26258 --advertise-addr=10.150.0.54:26257 --join=34.48.145.131:26257 --store path=/mnt/data1/cockroach,attrs=store1:node1:node1store1 --cache=25% --locality=cloud=gce,region=us-east4,zone=us-east4-a,rack=0 --log-config-file=logs.yaml --wal-failover=path=/mnt/data2/cockroach
~~~

Notice the flags passed to `cockroach start`:

- `--wal-failover`'s value is `path=/mnt/data2/cockroach` since that is the single failover disk
- `--log-config-file` is `logs.yaml`

> - and the data store (store 1) path in `--store` is `/mnt/data1/cockroach`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The data store (store 1) path in `--store` is `/mnt/data1/cockroach`
```

Author: ✅

> ## WAL Failover in action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## WAL failover in action
```

Author: ✅

The instructions in this section show how to trigger WAL failover by introducing disk stalls on one of the nodes in the cluster. Note that the steps are the same for [single-store](#single-store-config) or [multi-store](#multi-store-config) clusters.

### 1. Set up a node with scripts to trigger WAL Failover

> We will trigger WAL Failover on a node by slowing down the read bytes per second (`rbps`) and write bytes per second (`wbps`) for a disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trigger WAL failover on a node by slowing down the read bytes per second (`rbps`) and write bytes per second (`wbps`) for a disk.
```

Author: ✅

`ssh` into the node whose disk you want to stall and unstall.

> Run the `lsblk` command, and look for `MAJ:MIN` values for `/mnt/data1` in `lsblk` output. In this case it is `259:0`; we will use this for the disk stall/unstall scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the `lsblk` command, and look for `MAJ:MIN` values for `/mnt/data1` in `lsblk` output. In this case it is `259:0`; you will use this for the disk stall/unstall scripts.
```

Author: ✅

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
roachprod ssh $CLUSTER:1 lsblk
NAME    MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINTS
loop0     7:0    0  63.9M  1 loop /snap/core20/2182
loop1     7:1    0 354.3M  1 loop /snap/google-cloud-cli/223
loop2     7:2    0    87M  1 loop /snap/lxd/27428
loop3     7:3    0  39.1M  1 loop /snap/snapd/21184
sda       8:0    0    10G  0 disk
├─sda1    8:1    0   9.9G  0 part /
├─sda14   8:14   0     4M  0 part
└─sda15   8:15   0   106M  0 part /boot/efi
nvme0n1 259:0    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data1
nvme0n2 259:1    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data2
nvme0n3 259:2    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data3
nvme0n4 259:3    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data4
~~~

> Next, we will create scripts for stalling and unstalling the disk on this node. The script will add a line in `/sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max` to change the [cgroup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cgroups) settings "read bytes per second" (`rbps`) and "write bytes per second" (`wbps`) of the disk to a very low value for stalling, and a max value for unstalling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create scripts for stalling and unstalling the disk on this node. The script will add a line in `/sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max` to change the [cgroup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cgroups) settings "read bytes per second" (`rbps`) and "write bytes per second" (`wbps`) of the disk to a very low value for stalling, and a max value for unstalling.
```

> Create a shell script that will invoke the commands to stall and unstall alternately. We will call this script `wal-flip.sh`. Create `wal-flip.sh` with the content shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a shell script that will invoke the commands to stall and unstall alternately. Call this script `wal-flip.sh` with the content shown below:
```

Author: ✅

    sleep 5
    date
    echo "Unstalling"
    sudo echo '259:0 rbps=max wbps=max' > /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max
    sleep 10
    date
    echo "Stalling"
    sudo echo '259:0 rbps=4 wbps=4' > /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max
    sleep 15
    date
    echo "Unstalling"
    sudo echo '259:0 rbps=max wbps=max' > /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max
    sleep 20
    date
    echo "Stalling"
    sudo echo '259:0 rbps=4 wbps=4' > /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max
    sleep 40
    echo "UnStalling"
    sudo echo '259:0 rbps=max wbps=max' > /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max
    sleep 600
    exit
done
# eof
~~~

Next, make the script file executable:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
chmod 777 wal-flip.sh
~~~

Optionally, you can run a [workload]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-workload.md %}) at this point, if you want to see your workload continue during WAL failover. However, the presence of the workload does not have any bearing on the operation of WAL failover.

> ### 2. WAL Failover during transient disk stalls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2. WAL failover during transient disk stalls
```

Author: ✅

#### Cause transient disk stall

> Before triggering a WAL Failover, open the [DB Console]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overview.md %}) so that we can observe WAL Failover metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before triggering a WAL failover, open the [DB Console]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overview.md %}) so that you can observe WAL failover metrics.
```

Author: ✅

> Next, trigger WAL Failover by introducing a transient disk stall that is shorter in duration than the value of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables). We will run the `wal-flip.sh` script that we created in [the previous step](#1-set-up-a-node-with-scripts-to-trigger-wal-failover).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trigger WAL failover by introducing a transient disk stall that is shorter in duration than the value of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables). To do so, run the `wal-flip.sh` script that you created in [Step 1](#1-set-up-a-node-with-scripts-to-trigger-wal-failover).
```

Author: ✅

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
wal-flip.sh
~~~

> #### WAL Failover metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### WAL failover metrics
```

Author: ✅

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-metrics.md %}

Whenever a WAL failover occurs on a disk, `wal.failover.switch.count` for the associated store will increment by 1.

> In [DB Console's Advanced Debug page]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-custom-chart-debug-page.md %}), click on **Custom Time series chart**. On the custom chart page, add three charts: one for each of these metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [DB Console's **Advanced Debug** page]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-custom-chart-debug-page.md %}), click on **Custom Time series chart**. On the custom chart page, add three charts: one for each of the preceding metrics.
```

Author: ✅

Set the source of these metrics to be the node where you are running the disk stall/unstall script.

<img src="{{ 'images/v24.3/wal-failover-metrics-chart.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="WAL Failover Metrics Chart" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

> Notice there is a switchover followed by each stall. The node with the stalled disk continues to perform normal operations, during and after WAL failover as the stalls are transient and shorter than the current value of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice there is a switchover followed by each stall. The node with the stalled disk continues to perform normal operations during and after WAL failover, as the stalls are transient and shorter than the current value of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables).
```

Author: ✅

You can confirm that the node is still live and available using [`cockroach node status`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-node.md %}#node-status).

> ### 3. WAL Failover during long disk stalls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. WAL failover during long disk stalls
```

Author: ✅

#### Cause long disk stall

> Before triggering a WAL Failover, open the [DB Console]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overview.md %}) so that we can observe WAL Failover metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before triggering a WAL failover, open the [DB Console]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overview.md %}) so that you can observe WAL failover metrics.
```

Author: ✅

> Next, we will trigger WAL Failover by introducing a transient disk stall that is `100s` in duration (longer than the value of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trigger WAL Failover by introducing a transient disk stall that is `100s` in duration (longer than the value of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables)).
```

Author: ✅

> Create a file named `long-stall.sh` with the following content which will cause long disk stalls:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a file named `long-stall.sh` with the following content, which will cause long disk stalls:
```

Author: ✅

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
while (true)
do
    date
    echo "Stalling for 100 seconds"
    sudo echo '259:0 rbps=4 wbps=4' > /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max
    sleep 100
    date
    echo "Unstalling"
    sudo echo '259:0 rbps=max wbps=max' > /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max
    sleep 10
    date
    exit
done
~~~

> Next, make the script file executable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make the script file executable:
```

Author: ✅

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
chmod 777 wal-flip.sh
~~~

> Next, cause a long stall:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cause a long stall:
```

Author: ✅

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
long-stall.sh
~~~

> #### WAL Failover metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### WAL failover metrics
```

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-metrics.md %}

Whenever a WAL failover occurs on a disk, `wal.failover.switch.count` for the associated store will increment by 1.

When the disk continues to be stalled for longer than the duration of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables), the node goes down, and there is no more metrics data coming from that node.

You can confirm that the node is down (no longer live and available) using [`cockroach node status`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-node.md %}#node-status).

## Summary

### Important environment variables

Variable | Description | Default | Recommended value with WAL failover enabled
---------|-------------|---------|---------------------------------------------

> `COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT` | The threshold above which an observed engine sync duration triggers a fatal error. This environment variable is the default for the [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration) cluster setting. If that cluster setting is explicitly set, it takes precedence over this environment variable. | `20s`   | `40s`

Reviewer: Remove extra space

```suggestion
`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT` | The threshold above which an observed engine sync duration triggers a fatal error. This environment variable is the default for the [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration) cluster setting. If that cluster setting is explicitly set, it takes precedence over this environment variable. | `20s`  | `40s`
```

Author: ✅

> `COCKROACH_LOG_MAX_SYNC_DURATION` | The maximum duration the file sink is allowed to take to write a log entry before we fatal the process for a disk stall. | `20s` | `40s`

Reviewer: Not sure what "we fatal" means, but don't use "we" (per style) in any case.

```suggestion
`COCKROACH_LOG_MAX_SYNC_DURATION` | The maximum duration the file sink is allowed to take to write a log entry before we fatal the process for a disk stall. | `20s` | `40s`
```

Author: updated to "before the `cockroach` process is killed due to a disk stall"

### To enable WAL Failover

> [XXX](): YOU ARE HERE

Reviewer: Does this need to be removed?

```suggestion
[XXX](): YOU ARE HERE
```

Author: darth nooooooooooooooo

✅

> Setup your cluster for WAL failover with either [multiple stores](#multi-store-config) or a [side disk](#single-store-config).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set up your cluster for WAL failover with either [multiple stores](#multi-store-config) or a [side disk](#single-store-config).
```

Author: ✅

For [multiple stores](#multi-store-config), pass `--wal-failover=among-stores` to [`cockroach start`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}).

> For a [side disk on a single store config](#single-store-config), pass `--wal-failover={ path-to-side-drive-directory }` to [`cockroach start`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a [side disk on a single-store config](#single-store-config), pass `--wal-failover={ path-to-side-drive-directory }` to [`cockroach start`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}).
```

Author: ✅

Use remote log sinks, or if you use file-based logging, enable asynchronous buffering of `file-groups` log sinks:

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/misc/logging-flags.md %}

Change the value of `COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT` by setting it as follows:

1. Before starting the cluster, set it using the [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables) environment variable.

> 2. After starting the cluster, set it by changing the [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration) cluster setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. After starting the cluster, set it by changing the [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration) cluster setting.
```

Author: ✅

> 

Reviewer: Maybe remove this line break and make the below lines part of #2 here.

Author: ✅

> When WAL failover is enabled, we recommended using `40s` for this setting. If WAL failover is not enabled, **do not change the default value of this setting**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When WAL failover is enabled, Cockroach Labs recommends using `40s` for this setting. If WAL failover is not enabled, **do not change the default value of this setting**.
```

Author: ✅

> ### To monitor WAL Failover

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### To monitor WAL failover
```

Author: ✅

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-metrics.md %}

> ### WAL Failover behavior

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### WAL failover behavior
```

Author: ✅

If a disk stalls for less than the duration of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables), WAL failover will trigger and the node will continue to operate normally.

If a disk stalls for longer than the duration of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables), a WAL failover will trigger. Following that, since the duration of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables) has been exceeded, the node will go down.

> In a [multi-store](#multi-store-config) cluster, if a disk for a store has a transient stall, WAL will failover to the second store's disk. When the stall on the first disk clears, the WAL will failback to the first disk. WAL failover will daisy-chain from store _A_ to store _B_ to store _C_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a [multi-store](#multi-store-config) cluster, if a disk for a store has a transient stall, WAL will fail over to the second store's disk. When the stall on the first disk clears, the WAL will fail over to the first disk. WAL failover will daisy-chain from store _A_ to store _B_ to store _C_.
```

Author: gonna leave it as one word for now for easier Ctrl-F-ing

## FAQs

> ### 1. What are the benefits of WAL failover?

Reviewer: I don't think the headings in this FAQ need to be numbered -- after all the tutorial steps, it looks like they have to be read in sequence, but I don't think they do?

Author: no but i think let's leave them so folks can refer to them by number, we can always delete that later

~~~

### 7. How can I enable WAL failover during runtime in a multi-store cluster?

To enable WAL failover at runtime on a [multi-store cluster](#multi-store-config), make sure to configure log buffering as described in [Enable WAL failover]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}#enable-wal-failover).

Next, make sure the value of the [`storage.wal_failover.unhealthy_op_threshold`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-wal-failover-unhealthy-op-threshold) cluster setting is a duration less than the [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration) cluster setting:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET CLUSTER SETTING storage.wal_failover.unhealthy_op_threshold = '${value less than storage.max_sync_duration}'
~~~

The recommended value of the [`storage.wal_failover.unhealthy_op_threshold`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-wal-failover-unhealthy-op-threshold) cluster setting is `100ms`.

> ### 8. Can I enable WAL failover during runtime for a single data store cluster?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 8. Can I enable WAL failover during runtime for a single-store cluster?
```

Author: this one i'll pass b/c even though "single-store" is probably still technically correct (per our use of "store" terminology) i like "single data store" b/c it makes it clearer that one disk is the data store but you need another disk for the failover

Yes: If the side disk for WAL failover was configured before the cluster was started, set the [`storage.wal_failover.unhealthy_op_threshold`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-wal-failover-unhealthy-op-threshold) cluster setting to a value less than the [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration) cluster setting to enable WAL failover.

> No: If the side disk for WAL failover was **not** pre-configured before the cluster was started, changing the value of the [`storage.wal_failover.unhealthy_op_threshold`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-wal-failover-unhealthy-op-threshold) cluster setting to something less than the [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration) cluster setting **will not have any effect and when the disk stalls, WAL failover will not trigger**. In other words, you cannot enable WAL failover at runtime for a single store cluster if you did not [pre-configure a side disk](#single-store-config).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No: If the side disk for WAL failover was **not** pre-configured before the cluster was started, changing the value of the [`storage.wal_failover.unhealthy_op_threshold`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-wal-failover-unhealthy-op-threshold) cluster setting to something less than the [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration) cluster setting **will not have any effect, and when the disk stalls, WAL failover will not trigger**. In other words, you cannot enable WAL failover at runtime for a single-store cluster if you did not [pre-configure a side disk](#single-store-config).
```

### 9. Can I change the log buffering on a node before enabling WAL failover?

Yes.

### 10. Can I change the value of the `storage.max_sync_duration` cluster setting at cluster runtime?

Yes. To change [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration), issue a statement like the following:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET CLUSTER SETTING storage.max_sync_duration = '${desired_duration}';
~~~

### 11. When will Cockroach revert to writing a store's WAL on it's primary storage device? What if the secondary storage device stalls?

CockroachDB will monitor the latencies of the primary storage device in the background. As soon as latencies return to acceptable levels, the store will begin writing to the primary device. If the secondary stalls while in use by WAL failover, WAL failover will be unable to limit tail latencies, and the user workload will experience latencies until either the primary or the secondary recovers.

### 12. If there are more than 2 stores, will the WAL failover cascade from store A to B to C?

> Store _A_ will failover to store _B_, store _B_ will failover to store _C_, and store _C_ will failover to store _A_, but store A will never failover to store C.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Store _A_ will fail over to store _B_, store _B_ will fail over to store _C_, and store _C_ will fail over to store _A_, but store A will never fail over to store C.
```

Author: passing due to sticking with "failover" for the reasons from my other comment

> However, the WAL failback operation will not cascade back until **all drives are available** - that is, if store _A_'s disk unstalls while store _B_ is still stalled, store _C_ will not failback to store _A_ until _B_ also becomes available again. In other words, _C_ must failback to _B_, which must then failback to _A_.

Reviewer: Are you using failback here to specifically refer to failover in the other direction? If so, apologies for suggesting it be changed in other places. I assumed they were synonymous and that we needed to stick to one term.

```suggestion
However, the WAL failover operation will not cascade back until **all drives are available** - that is, if store _A_'s disk unstalls while store _B_ is still stalled, store _C_ will not fail over to store _A_ until _B_ also becomes available again. In other words, _C_ must fail over to _B_, which must then fail over to _A_.
```

---
title: WAL Failover
summary: Mitigate the effects of disk stalls in cloud deployments by failing over WAL writes to a secondary store.
toc: true
docs_area: deploy
---

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-intro.md %}

This page has detailed information about WAL failover, including:

- How WAL failover works.
- How to enable WAL failover.
- How to disable WAL failover.
- How to test WAL failover.
- How to monitor WAL failover.
- How to configure WAL failover in multi-store configurations.
- Frequently Asked Questions about WAL failover.

For basic information about WAL failover, see [`cockroach start` > WAL failover]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}#write-ahead-log-wal-failover).

## Why WAL Failover?

> In cloud environments transient [disk stalls]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-setup-troubleshooting.md %}#disk-stalls) are common, often lasting on the order of several seconds. This will negatively impact latency for the user-facing foreground workload. In the field, we have observed that stalls occur most frequently while writing to the WAL. While we cannot prevent disk stalls, we can minimize their impact on CockroachDB. That is where WAL failover comes into play.

Reviewer 2: > In the field, we have observed that stalls occur most frequently while writing to the WAL

This sentence isn't quite right. Stalls apply to the various files of the storage engine with equal frequency, but a stall of the write-ahead log is the most impactful to foreground latencies. (Because most other writes, like those of flushes and compactions happen asynchronously in the background and foreground operations do not need to wait for them.)

Author: Updated to the following based on your comment - PTAL

> In the field, we have observed that stalls while writing to the WAL are the most impactful to foreground latencies. Most other writes, such as flushes and compactions, happen asynchronously in the background and foreground operations do not need to wait for them.

WAL failover uses a secondary disk to failover WAL writes to when transient disk stalls occur. This limits the write impact to a few hundreds of milliseconds (the [failover threshold, which is configurable]()). Note that WAL failover _only preserves availability of writes_. If reads to the underlying storage are also stalled, operations that read and do not find data in the block cache or page cache will stall.

## Creating and configuring a cluster to be ready for WAL Failover

The steps to provision a cluster that has single data store vs a multi-store cluster are slightly different. In this section, we will provide high-level instructions for setting up each of these configurations. We will use [GCE](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs) as the environment. You will need to translate these instructions into the steps used by the deployment tools in your environment.

<a name="single-store-config"></a>

> ### Provisioning a cluster with single data store, single failover store for WAL failover

Reviewer 2: nit: maybe we should say "single failover disk" or "single failover volume" to avoid using the word "store," since a store is its own concept in the CockroachDB ecosystem.

Author: updated to "single failover disk" since we also use that term elsewhere in the document

thanks for the catch and the reminder about our "store" terminology

loop3     7:3    0  39.1M  1 loop /snap/snapd/21184
sda       8:0    0    10G  0 disk
├─sda1    8:1    0   9.9G  0 part /
├─sda14   8:14   0     4M  0 part
└─sda15   8:15   0   106M  0 part /boot/efi
nvme0n1 259:0    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data1
nvme0n2 259:1    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data2
~~~

Here we can see the path to `data2` volume is `/mnt/data2`. For each node, create the directory `/mnt/data2/cockroach` on the side disk volume where the WAL failover data can be written. `/mnt/data1` will be used as the single user data store for the cluster.

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
mkdir /mnt/data2/cockroach
~~~

<a name="5-sidecar-start"></a>

#### 5. Starting the cluster with WAL failover enabled

To enable WAL failover when we start the cluster,  we can either pass the [`--wal-failover=path={ path-to-my-side-disk-for-wal-failover }` to `cockroach start`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md%}#enable-wal-failover)

 *OR*

set [the environment variable `COCKROACH_WAL_FAILOVER=path={ path-to-my-side-disk-for-wal-failover }`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md%}#enable-wal-failover) before starting the cluster.

> Additionally, we must set the value of the environment variable `COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT` to `40s`. This variable controls the duration of stall when CockroachDB crashes the node.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this might benefit from more context. Maybe something like:

> Additionally, we must set the value of the environment variable `COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT` to `40s`. By default, CockroachDB detects prolonged stalls and crashes the node after 20s. With WAL failover enabled, CockroachDB should be able to survive stalls of up to 40s with minimal impact to the workload

Author: thanks i have updated to use that language here and in the other section where we discuss setting this env var

Replicate the shell commands below on each node using your preferred deployment model. Be sure to edit the values of the flags passed to [`cockroach start`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md %}) as needed for your environment.

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
$ export COCKROACH_LOG_MAX_SYNC_DURATION=40s
$ export COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT=40s
$ cockroach start --certs-dir certs --listen-addr=:26257 --http-addr=:26258 --advertise-addr=10.150.0.54:26257 --join=34.48.145.131:26257 --store path=/mnt/data1/cockroach,attrs=store1:node1:node1store1 --cache=25% --locality=cloud=gce,region=us-east4,zone=us-east4-a,rack=0 --log-config-file=logs.yaml --wal-failover=path=/mnt/data2/cockroach
~~~

Notice the flags passed to `cockroach start`:

- `--wal-failover`'s value is `path=/mnt/data2/cockroach` since that is the single failover disk
- `--log-config-file` is `logs.yaml`
- and the data store (store 1) path in `--store` is `/mnt/data1/cockroach`

<a name="multi-store-config"></a>

> ### Provisioning a multi-store cluster for WAL failover

Reviewer 2: nit: my personal preference would be for us to highlight the multi-store configuration first. It's a bit easier and makes more sense economically since the secondary is not dormant most of the time.

Author: that makes sense, i have moved the multi-store configuration to be first in the doc

#### 1. Create the cluster

Provision a 3 node cluster with 4 SSDs for each node. Deploy each node to a different region (e.g. [in GCE](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/regions-zones), `us-east4-a`, `us-west2-b`, `us-central1-c`). Be sure to [create a separate volume for each SSD](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/disks).

#### 2. Stage the cluster

[Install CockroachDB]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/install-cockroachdb-linux.md %}) on each node.

#### 3. Log Configuration for WAL Failover

If you are logging to a file-based sink, create a `logs.yaml` file. Later on, you will pass this file to `cockroach start` when starting each node in the cluster. Not doing so will negate the positive impact of enabling WAL failover, because writes to the diagnostic logs may block indefinitely during the disk stall, effectively stalling the node.

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-log-config.md %}

Next transfer this file to the nodes on the cluster.

For more information about how to configure CockroachDB logs, see [Configure logs]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-logs.md %}).

#### 4. Starting the multi-store cluster with WAL failover enabled

> To enable WAL failover when we start the cluster,  we can either pass the [`--wal-failover=path={ path-to-my-side-disk-for-wal-failover }` to `cockroach start`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md%}#enable-wal-failover)

Reviewer 2: This should say `--wal-failover=among-stores`

Author: fixed!

 *OR*

> set [the environment variable `COCKROACH_WAL_FAILOVER=path={ path-to-my-side-disk-for-wal-failover }`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-start.md%}#enable-wal-failover) before starting the cluster.

Reviewer 2: and `COCKROACH_WAL_FAILOVER=among-stores`

Author: fixed!

loop1     7:1    0 354.3M  1 loop /snap/google-cloud-cli/223
loop2     7:2    0    87M  1 loop /snap/lxd/27428
loop3     7:3    0  39.1M  1 loop /snap/snapd/21184
sda       8:0    0    10G  0 disk
├─sda1    8:1    0   9.9G  0 part /
├─sda14   8:14   0     4M  0 part
└─sda15   8:15   0   106M  0 part /boot/efi
nvme0n1 259:0    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data1
nvme0n2 259:1    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data2
nvme0n3 259:2    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data3
nvme0n4 259:3    0   375G  0 disk /mnt/data4
~~~

Next, we will create scripts for stalling and unstalling the disk on this node. The script will add a line in `/sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max` to change the [cgroup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cgroups) settings "read bytes per second" (`rbps`) and "write bytes per second" (`wbps`) of the disk to a very low value for stalling, and a max value for unstalling.

Create text files with the commands that change the cgroup settings:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
echo '259:0 rbps=4 wbps=4' > stall.txt
echo '259:0 rbps=max wbps=max' > unstall.txt
echo 'wq! /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max' > cmd.txt

> ~~~

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should use these scripts. It's very strange to use vim in this way.

The user should be able to run
```
sudo echo '259:0 rbps=4 wbps=4' > /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max
```
to "stall" the device and
```
sudo echo '259:0 rbps=max wbps=max' > /sys/fs/cgroup/system.slice/cockroach-system.service/io.max
```
to unstall.

Author: i've removed `stall.txt` `unstall.txt`, and `cmd.txt`

and replaced the use of passing `stall.txt` to `vim` to use the `echo` statements you provided for stalling and unstalling instead

Notice there is a switchover followed by the disk stall. Since the disk continues to be stalled for longer than the duration of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables), the node goes down, and there is no more metrics data coming from that node.

<img src="{{ 'images/v24.3/wal-failover-long-stall-metrics.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="WAL Failover Metrics - Long Stall" style="border:1px solid #eee;max-width:100%" />

You can confirm that the node is down (no longer live and available) using [`cockroach node status`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-node.md %}#node-status).

## Summary

### Important environment variables

| Variable                                     | Description                                                                                                              | Default | Recommended value with WAL failover enabled |
|----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------+---------------------------------------------|

> | `COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT` | The threshold above which an observed engine sync duration triggers a fatal error.                                       | `20s`   | `40s`                                       |

Reviewer 2: Note that this environment variable is the _default_ for the `storage.max_sync_duration` cluster setting. If that cluster setting is explicitly set, it takes precedence over this environment variable.

Author: thanks, i added that info to this description of the env variable

When WAL failover is enabled, we recommended using `40s` for this setting. If WAL failover is not enabled, **do not change the default value of this setting**.

### To monitor WAL Failover

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-metrics.md %}

### WAL Failover behavior

If a disk stalls for less than the duration of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables), WAL failover will trigger and the node will continue to operate normally.

If a disk stalls for longer than the duration of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables), a WAL failover will trigger. Following that, since the duration of [`COCKROACH_ENGINE_MAX_SYNC_DURATION_DEFAULT`](#important-environment-variables) has been exceeded, the node will go down.

In a [multi-store](#multi-store-config) cluster, if a disk for a store has a transient stall, WAL will failover to the second store's disk. When the stall on the first disk clears, the WAL will failback to the first disk. WAL failover will daisy-chain from store _A_ to store _B_ to store _C_.

> However, failback will not cascade until all drives become available again: that is, if the disk for store _A_ unstalls while the disk for store _B_ is still stalled, store _C_ will not failback to store _A_ until the intermediate disk _B_ also becomes available again.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this sentence is saying, but I don't think it's correct. We should remove it.

Author: deleted!

## FAQs

### 1. What are the benefits of WAL failover?

WAL failover provides the following benefits:

- Improves resiliency against transient [disk stalls]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-setup-troubleshooting.md %}#disk-stalls).

> - Minimizes the impact of disk stalls on write latency. Bounding p99.9+ latencies by about `100ms` in the event of a stall, rather than `min(20s, stall time)`.

Reviewer 2: Let's say that it bounds raft log latencies to about `100ms` in the event of a stall, which helps reduce the stall's impact on query tail latencies.

I want to avoid making any claims about how well we bound specific percentiles of user tail latencies, because it really depends on stall, how much of the data is available in the block cache or page cache, etc.

Author: makes sense - updated as follows, PTAL to ensure i didn't introduce an inaccuracy

> - Minimizes the impact of disk stalls on write latency. Bounds [Raft log]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#raft) latencies to about `100ms` in the event of a stall, which helps reduce the stall's impact on query tail latencies.

### 2. For single-data store clusters, what should be the size of an additional side disk for WAL failover?

The side disk should have the following properties:

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/wal-failover-side-disk.md %}

### 3. Where should WAL failover be enabled?

WAL failover should be enabled for any cloud deployments on AWS, GCP, or Azure.

It's also a good practice in on-premise deployments; however, it is at the discretion of the DBA or cluster administrator.

> ### 4. What is the best practice value for disk stall duration after which a node will crash?

Reviewer 2: maybe we should phrase this as

"What is the best practice `storage.max_sync_duration`?"

I find the current phrasing a bit confusing.

Author: updated to that language

The recommended default value of the [`storage.wal_failover.unhealthy_op_threshold`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-wal-failover-unhealthy-op-threshold) cluster setting is `100ms`.

### 9. Can I change the log buffering on a node before enabling WAL failover?

Yes.

### 10. Does configuring WAL Failover on a running cluster require rolling restarts?

Yes: For a single-store cluster, if you did not have a side disk pre-configured for WAL failover, you will need to do a rolling restart.

Yes: For a multi-store cluster, if you are using file-based logging and did not have log buffering configured according to [3. Log Configuration for WAL Failover](#3-log-configuration-for-wal-failover), you will need to do a rolling restart.

> No: In all other cases, you can enable WAL failover without doing a rolling restart.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this "frequently-asked question". You must restart the process to begin to pass `--wal-failover=among-stores` or `COCKROACH_WAL_FAILOVER=among-stores`. IMO, that's what it means to "enable" it.

Author: removed it! (and renumbered around it)

### 11. After WAL failover is enabled on a cluster, is it safe for the customer to perform all normal operations?

> Yes.

Reviewer 2: I also don't really like this frequently-asked question. It's not really saying anything.

Author: removed!

### 12. Can I change the value of the `storage.max_sync_duration` cluster setting at cluster runtime?

Yes. To change [`storage.max_sync_duration`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-storage-max-sync-duration), issue a statement like the following:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET CLUSTER SETTING storage.max_sync_duration = '${desired_duration}';
~~~

> ### 13. If store A has a momentary stall, and it fails over to store B, and B's stall is longer than A's stall, will the WAL failback to A?

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should change this question to be:

> When will Cockroach revert to writing a store's WAL on it's primary storage device? What if the secondary storage device stalls?

And the answer something like:

> CockroachDB will monitor the latencies of the primary storage device in the background. As soon as latencies return to acceptable levels, the store will begin writing to the primary device. If the secondary stalls while in use by WAL failover, WAL failover will be unable to limit tail latencies, and the user workload will experience latencies until either the primary or the secondary recovers.

Author: updated the question and answer with your text

Yes, the WAL will failback to store _A_ as soon as CockroachDB determines that _A_'s stall has abated (regardless of whether store _B_'s disk has stalled or not).

### 14. If there are more than 2 stores, will the WAL failover cascade from store A to B to C?

> Yes, for example if store _A_'s disk stalls for `30s`, the WAL will failover to store B after `100ms`. While store _A_ is still stalled at the `20s` mark, if store _B_'s disk fails, store _B_ will failover to store _C_. When _B_ fails, only _B_'s WAL write will failover to _C_; if _A_ is still down, _A_'s write will not failover to _C_.

Reviewer 2: This is confusing. I would not say this is a "yes" to the question. Store A will failover to store B, store B to store C, and store C to store A, but store A will never failover to store C.

Author: i replaced this sentence with what you wrote and the section now reads as follows, PTAL

> Store _A_ will failover to store _B_, store _B_ will failover to store _C_, and store _C_ will failover to store _A_, but store A will never failover to store C.

> However, the WAL failback operation will not cascade back until **all drives are available** - that is, if store _A_'s disk unstalls while store _B_ is still stalled, store _C_ will not failback to store _A_ until _B_ also becomes available again. In other words, _C_ must failback to _B_, which must then failback to _A_.
